---
title: >
  All it takes is a little Dutch courage
subtitle: >
  Attempting to preserve the Holland Club with help from social media
date: "2012-01-12 21:32:49 +0000"

# Attributes from Felix Online V1
id: "1970"
old_path: /comment/1970/all-it-takes-is-a-little-dutch-courage
aliases:
 - /comment/1970/all-it-takes-is-a-little-dutch-courage
imported: true
comments:

# Article Taxonomies
categories:
 - comment
tags:
 - comment
 - imported
authors:
 - felix
highlights:

# Homepage control params
headline: true
featured: true

# Image metadata
image_path: "http://felixonline.co.uk/"
image_caption: >

image_width: ""
image_height: ""
image_attribution: ""
image_attribution_link: ""
video_url: ""
---

The rumoured closure of the Holland Club has seen an immense response from the College community. From staff to postgraduate students, the actions of College with regards to its feasibility study have been watched ever closely since rumours of a possible closure surfaced over last term. Could the severity of such a campaign, employing a sizeable Facebook page, make a change to the study and potentially, the future of the Holland Club?

The College has clearly been paying attention to the opinions that have been generated by the Facebook group. On Wednesday an [announcement](http://www2.imperial.ac.uk/blog/announcements/2012/01/11/feedback-invited-on-catering-and-amenity-offer-on-south-kensington-campus/) on the Imperial College website called for feedback and input into the feasibility study, considering such areas as “what additional catering and amenities would best serve the needs of staff and students on the South Kensington campus” and “how the ethos of the Holland Club might be maintained within any new facilities”. The resulting comments continue the great deal of worry from patrons of the bar as already expressed on the Facebook group.

How the College proceeds with the feasibility study will, of course, be affected by the sheer number of people who have taken to the relative channels to express their opinions over the rumoured plans. Hundreds of campaigners will doubtless be studying the issue with keen interest, which College cannot simply ignore. Any conclusions from the study must be able to withstand the heaviest of scrutiny if they are to be accepted by the community.

The Holland Club is not a stranger to potential closure, with Felix reporting in June 1995 on its then-financial difficulties. Nearly seventeen years on, and under whole new circumstances many have taken it upon themselves to fight for its continued existence, which is, at the very least, a testament to its popularity amongst staff and indeed students.

As the coming days bring more news of the College’s conclusions into the study, the campaign is likely to grow ever larger. Indeed, some patrons have even been considering events such as a sit-in in order to express their feelings. Regardless of the outcome, there’s no denying that the supporters of the Holland Club are ready and prepared to fight their case whatever the case may be.
