---
title: >
  Our pick of 2013
subtitle: >
  Maciej Matuszewski recommends five great upcoming SF books
date: "2013-01-24 23:01:34 +0000"

# Attributes from Felix Online V1
id: "3169"
old_path: /books/3169/our-pick-of-2013
aliases:
 - /books/3169/our-pick-of-2013
imported: true
comments:

# Article Taxonomies
categories:
 - books
tags:
 - imported
 - multi-author
authors:
 - mc4509
 - mtm10
highlights:

# Homepage control params
headline: true
featured: true
image: "http://felixonline.co.uk/"
image_caption: ""
---

__The Ocean at the End of the Lane__
_Neil Gaiman_
 Released June 18

After eight long years [genre favourite Neil Gaiman](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEKheZs2dkg) is finally set to return to adult fiction with _The Ocean at the End of the Lane_. Gaiman has been relatively quiet about this book but, as with his previous work, you should expect a well written and deeply atmospheric gothic tale. Gaiman has won more awards than I have space to list and, in my opinion, has never written a bad novel so this book is a must.

__The Unreal and the Real__
_Ursula K. Le Guin_
 Released January 3

There are few SF authors who could claim to be most influential than Ursula Le Guin. Including both acknowledged classics, like the award winning _The Ones Who Walk Away_ from Omelas as well as less known works, this two volume set is great for both fans and Le Guin novices. Each story beautifully displays Le Guin’s skills, both in characterisation and plotting as well as in writing style.

__The Republic of Thieves__
_Scott Lynch_
 Released July 13

The long awaited third novel in Lynch’s _Gentleman Bastard_ series. Lynch is rightfully acclaimed for having created an intricate and unique fantastical setting heavily influences by Renaissance Italy. While the previous novel was let down by poor characterisation it was still one of the best 2007 fantasies. The perfect opportunity to get your epic fantasy fix – at least until the latest Patrick Rothfuss novel is released.

__Dead Ever After__
_Charlaine Harris_
 Released May 7

The final novel of the Sookie Stackhouse finally hits the shelves. While the series could never claim to be intellectually satisfying it has always been good fun as a guilty pleasure and this book looks set to be a fitting conclusion. With the sixth season of _True Blood_, the hit TV show based on the series, set to begin in June this is the perfect opportunity to catch up with the books that started it all.

__The Human Division__
_John Scalzi_
 Released May 14

Acclaimed author and Science Fiction Writers of America President John Scalzi returns to his _Old Man’s War_ universe with an experimental ‘episodic’ novel. Each chapter is partially stand-alone and will be released individually in the months prior to the full book’s release date. Having been favourably compared to the works of Richard Heinlein and John Campbell this is certainly worth checking out.
