---
title: >
  EU Xmas
subtitle: >
  Or, around the glorious federation in a delicious meal. Follow felix on a tour of some traditional christmas delicacies from countries across Europe. Bonus points if you’re sober at the end.
date: "2016-12-16 15:56:30 +0000"
# Attributes from Felix Online V1
id: "6621"
old_path: /food/6621/eu-xmas
aliases:
 - /food/6621/eu-xmas

# Article Taxonomies
categories:
 - food
tags:
headline: true
featured: true

# Image metadata
image_path: "http://felixonline.co.uk/"
image_caption: >

image_width: ""
image_height: ""
image_attribution: ""
image_attribution_link: ""
video_url: ""

# Author metadata
author_id: ""
author_name: ""
author_image_path: ""
author_twitter: ""
author_facebook: ""
author_website_url: ""
author_website_title: ""

comments:
imported: true
---

It’s time to get ready for the Christmas dinner – if you already had it, well, it’s never too late to have a second or third one. I mean, it’s Christmas – you can celebrate it as many times as you want. And now that you are a student, time to try something different. I’m not saying that the food your mom has made in the past (well, your whole life, actually) is not good, just that you deserve a change – and go international! Or, if you come from one of those countries/families that don’t make such a big fuss about Christmas, celebrate it with style for the first time.
Start your Christmas dinner French – l’aperitif must be French. Have some foie gras on slices of bread and some smoked salmon – the pretentious kind, served in small bites. Of course, have wine and cheese from France too.

Continue it with some Romanian traditional “sarmale” – really just some cabbage leaves stuffed with a minced pork and beef mixture – served with warm “mamaliga” – polenta cooked in a really delicious way: boiled in water until it’s thick and then baked a bit in the oven – with some cream.

Time to have German drinks, too. I don’t have to spell it out for you: beer. Or, if you feel brave enough, go all Russian, but don’t mix them, and try to enjoy an almost sober Christmas party. Try some Czech salad: potatoes with mayonnaise, hard-boiled eggs and boiled veggies. You can eat it as a main dish, too.

Make your Christmas table look gorgeous with the Austrian traditional pig head – it tastes even better than it looks and if you want some delicacy – pig cheeks. Or, if you fancy some poultry, you can return to France with their amazing dinde aux marrons – another fancy way of cooking turkey, but, hey, it’s Christmas so you must go fancy! And complement it with something you cannot pronounce yourself: Rødkål (red cabbage).

Time for the best part – dessert! I recommend Italian, panettone with zabaglione cream. I know you understand me, and it’s not a bad decision to invest in a good one. Don’t forget the “British” part – you must celebrate the country you currently live in – with a gingerbread house. You will get extra points if you actually bake and assemble it yourself,  but you can totally rock the table with a good looking bought one. Really, any dessert will do, but make sure that it either has a lot of chocolate or it’s damn good.

End in style with some hot chocolate and stroopwafflen – compliments to the Dutch.
P.S. you can, if you want, go all Japanese and have KFC. No, I’m not crazy – they really do go wild for fried chicken at Christmas!
