---
published: true
headline: false
featured: true
comments_disabled: false
title: ICXCAC head to the LUCA outdoors competition
authors:
  - jack_mitchell
image: >-
  https://f001.backblazeb2.com/file/felixonline/2017_felix_issues/issue_1691/1691_sports_CX.jpg
subtitle: >-
  The running crew head off to Parliament Hill and the LUCA outdoors
  competition.
date: '2018-05-04 12:00:00'
categories:
  - sport
---
The sun was shining, and despite the early start for many, the ICXCAC team was smiling. Why? It was time for the LUCA (London Universities and Colleges Athletics) outdoors athletics series, beginning at Parliament Hill athletics track. On 15th April, the first meeting kicked off, with competitors from all across London battling to top the points table going into the second event of the series. The complete range of events was on offer, from steeple chase to javelin, and this event provided a perfect opportunity for the many first-timers to get introduced to the sport. 

By 9am, we had planted the Imperial flag and the team was all set to over-enthusiastically cheer on their fellow competitors. The day began with the signature event of this meet, the 10,000m, followed by the 1500m. ICXCAC had plenty to cheer for early on, with a 1-2 finish in the men’s 1500m by Oliver Newton and James Millett respectively. An excellent performance too from Helena Dona in the women’s race.  Following on from this, Imperial was strongly represented in the 400m, with four competitors including Athletics’ Captain Max Thorp. Great performances followed by ex-captain Raul Rinken in javelin, shot put and discus throw, with him winning the javelin event. 

> “Imperial is now in 3rd place in the points table behind King’s and UCL, but it is all to play for with two more events to come”

Other successes of the day included another win by James Millett in the 800m and by Oliver Newton in the steeple chase (think 3000m but with hurdles and puddles). A special mention too for Club Captain Alex Mundell who bagged a massive 22 points for the team across her many events. The highlight of the day was the 5000m, with four athletes entered from Imperial, purely because of the sheer quality of the chants generated by the Imperial cheer squad (video evidence can be supplied). There could be no doubting our team spirit, especially given our latest innovation of Imperial-brand transfer tattoos – although this did lead to many weird looks on the tube ride back (possibly due to them being on our foreheads…). 

So, all in all, another great event! The first of the series finished with Imperial in 3rd place in the points table behind King’s and UCL, but it is all to play for with two more events to come. The bigger the team, the more points we can win so if you’ve ever been tempted to give athletics a try, now is your chance! This incredibly casual event offers you the perfect opportunity to unleash your inner athlete (and help beat UCL in the process). In joining ICXCAC you not only get the chance to take part in this great competition, but you get to be part of one of the best clubs in Imperial. So why wait? 