---
published: true
headline: false
featured: true
title: "Joker"
subtitle: "Joaquin Phoenix shines in Todd Phillip’s take on the Clown Prince of Crime’s Origin Story"
image: >-
  https://f001.backblazeb2.com/file/felixonline/2019_felix_issues/issue_1729/1729_film_joker.jpg
authors:
  - andrew_melville
date: '2019-10-11 17:00:00'
categories:
  - film
---
_3 stars_

Joker opens incredibly well. Lawrence Sher’s cinematography only adds to an already stunning performance from Joaquin Phoenix, while both are elevated by the original score. Robert De Niro’s inclusion as a late night talk show host adds even more credulity to the whole endeavour. But unfortunately, Joker falls flat. The main source of tension for the majority of the films 2 hour runtime was my worry that every bloke who sneaked out to the toilets would return with an AR-15.

Gratuitous violence, unsettling dancing, and humourless laughter all create an uncomfortable atmosphere that is sustained from the films sluggish beginning until its thrilling final act. But Joker suffers from its relatively small budget of only $60 million. For some sense of scale, The Lego Batman cost $80 million. Because of this, Phillips is forced to keep the scale of the film small, which at times feels at odds with the character we expect to see; despite this, Phoenix carries.

A refreshing take on the Joker’s origin story was necessary to escape the shadow cast by Heath Ledger’s 2008 performance, but Joker falls short in its execution. Phillips’ homage to Taxi Driver in theme, setting and scene only serves to add to this shadow, as the borrowed imagery of 1970s New York just reminds me of a better version of this plotline.  But despite running 8 minutes longer than Taxi Driver, it manages to accomplish much less. 

In spite of this, diehard Batman fans will love this film. Phillips is true to the source material while reviving the lore of the Joker in a way that feels fresh and new. Had Phillips not managed this, the character may have finally reached its natural conclusion on screen. God forbid. Phoenix’s performance manages to elevate some incredibly average dialogue, and fans will love his take on the transformation that Arthur Fleck undergoes. It’s a transformation that culminates in a thrilling third act that doesn’t quite justify the £6.99 ticket.
